---
title: "Reflections on accessibility"
date: 2023-11-24T10:47:58+10:00
jobtitle: "Human Computer Interaction"
promoted: true
weight: 1
---


There has been a 365% increase in smartphone use within the blind community in less than five years. Specifically, in the over 65 age group smartphone use has surged from 6% to 78%, which means that further focus on accessibility and useability is required.

The research recommends user-led research in product and service development



The article identifies two key findings from this study. First, a significant number of people with low vision or blindness use their smartphones as a part of their everyday lives and for a broad range of purposes. Secondly, through this survey we identified the emergence of a narrative regarding the importance of user-led research in product and service development.

The  second  part  of  our  survey  examined  the  nature  of  participants  smart-phone  use.  The  majority  of  participants  that  owned  a  smartphone  had  an  Apple  device  (74%),  with  26%  choosing  an  Android.  The  accessibility  features  of  the  phone  were  a  dominant  reason  for  their  phone  choice  (48%).  Those  who  used  a  smartphone  used  it  throughout  their  everyday  life  −  84%  citing  they  used  it  throughout  the  day,  and  for  a  broad  range  of  purposes.  While  making  and  receiving  calls  was  the  most  commonly  cited  use  (97%),  there  was  a  range  of  uses  noted.  The  age  of  the  participant  affected  the  breadth  of  use  –  there  was  a  significant  reduction  in  the  amount  of  people  over  65  years  of  age  using  their  smartphone  beyond  phone  calls.  For  example,  33%  used  it  for  emails,  24%  for  accessing  the  Web,  and  17%  used  social  media.  This  was  a  reduction  of  over  25%  in  each  category  compared  to  participants  under  65.The  use  of  built-in  assistive  features  was  common  across  participants:  65%  used  voiceover  screen  reader,  43%  used  text  resize,  41%  used  zoom  and  magnification,  32%  used  contrast,  colour  and  brightness  adjustments,  and  18%  used  audio  description.  Voice  assistants  such  as  Siri  were  also  popular,  with  80%  of  participants  using  the  program  for  a  range  of  purposes.Beyond  the  smartphone,  participants  used  a  range  of  assistive  technology:  33%  used  screen  reading  software,  34%  used  smart  home  devices,  27%  used  DISABILITy & SOCIETy119screen  magnification  software  and  9%  used  bone  conduction  headphones.  Fifty  six  percent  cited  other  assistive  technology,  with  iPads  and  tablets  being   a   dominant   response,   as   well   as   computers,   Apple   watch   and   DAISy  Player.Accessibility  apps  were  also  used  widely  (over  50%  of  participants  responded  to  our  questions  regarding  the  use  of  apps)  and  for  a  range  of  purposes.  AI  based  apps  were  the  most  commonly  used,  followed  by  GPS/Navigation  apps,  reading  apps  and  human  assistance  apps.  However,  13%  of  responses  stated  they  had  either  never  heard  of  these  apps  or  had  heard  of  them,  but  did  not  use  them,  or  know  how  to  use  them.  The  amount  of  time  participants  had  been  blind  or  had  developed  low  vision  impacted  upon  app  uptake  –  for  those  with  less  than  5  years’  experience  of  their  vision  loss,  only  29%  used  accessibility  apps.  There  were  also  some  poignant  reflections  from  some  participants  on  how  the  apps  they  use  now  (or  do  not  use)  may  shift  accord-ing  to  changing  contexts  –  ‘I  currently  don’t  use  Apps  to  help  me  get  around,  but  in  this  time  of  social  distancing  with  Covid19  I  anticipate  a  need  to  use  something  like  Aira  to  help  me  follow  someone  into  a  medical  consultation  to  avoid  taking  their  arm  and  getting  too  close’.Issues  with  the  apps  designed  for  people  who  are  blind  or  have  low  vision  were  most  commonly  cited  as  ‘glitches/technical  issues’  (44%).  Thirty  eight  percent  expressed  they  were  difficult  to  use  or  understand,  and  another  35%  stated  they  were  not  fully  accessible.  When  participants  had  issues  with  an  app  and  found  that  it  wasn’t  accessible,  most  chose  to  delete  it  or  not  use  it  anymore. 


# Reference
\[1\] Locke, Kathryn, et al. "Developing accessible technologies for a changing world: understanding how people with vision impairment use smartphones." Disability & Society 37.1 (2022): 111-128.
\[2\] https://aira.io/
